# House of Reps 2024-08-12

## Cost of Living

Mr DUTTON (Dickson—Leader of the Opposition) (14:19):  My question is to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister has broken promises to cut electricity bills, to provide cheaper mortgages and to ensure that families will be better off on the cost of living. The price of electricity is now up by 22 per cent. We've endured 12 mortgage rate hikes, and the prices for food and groceries are more up more than 11 per cent. Isn't it clear to Australians this government has lost its way because of this Prime Minister's lack of economic management and experience and general incompetence?

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (14:19):  I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his question. Of course, the Leader of the Opposition asked me about cost of living, and there's one thing that is consistent about our cost-of-living measures: they have all been opposed by those opposite. Even last week, they opposed the tax cuts that we gave to every Australian taxpayer. Those opposite were against that. They opposed the energy price relief plan that we put in place. They were against that. They were opposed to fee-free TAFE. They were against that. They were opposed to cheaper child care. They were against that. We know they were opposed to wage rises, whether it be the three increases to the minimum wage or the additional wage rises for people who work in aged care or who work as early educators in our childcare system. We know that that was the case.

But we also know that those opposite, when it comes to economic policy, do have some half-baked plans. They have a plan for nuclear reactors, sometime in the 2040s, but they won't tell us how much they will cost. What we do know is that they are the costliest form of new energy. We know it will take too long and we know, even after all that, it will produce something like four per cent of the energy needs that Australia has.

We know also that they have a plan to break up supermarkets. Now, I'm not sure who will buy the Coles supermarket at their local shopping centre next to Woolworths, but I suspect it will probably be Woolworths. There's nothing, of course, to stop IGA setting up anywhere in the country. But that's what happens when you have the Nats running their economic policy.

Opposition members interjecting—

Mr ALBANESE:  But they came out with something else last week: zonal taxation. Depending upon where you live, you will pay a different rate of tax under this Leader of the Opposition.

Opposition members interjecting—

Mr ALBANESE:  This is the troika of economic irrationality: zonal taxation depending upon where you live; breaking up private sector companies through forced divestment, and nuclear reactors, owned by the government, sometime in the 2040s. The party of Menzies is a long time gone. (Time expired)

The SPEAKER:  Order! There is far too much noise on my left. The Manager of Opposition Business and the Leader of the Nationals are continually interjecting. We're just going to have a bit more silence during the answer to this question.

## Early Childhood Education

Ms PAYNE (Canberra) (14:23):  My question is to the Minister for Early Childhood Education. How is the Albanese Labor government recognising the professional work of early childhood educators and helping them with the cost of living? What approaches to early childhood education has the government rejected? 

Dr ALY (Cowan—Minister for Early Childhood Education and Minister for Youth) (14:23):  I thank the amazing member for Canberra for her question and for her ongoing advocacy and support for early childhood education and care workers in Canberra. Last week, the Albanese government made a historic announcement of a 15 per cent wage increase for early childhood education and care workers—workers who carry out the vital and important role of caring for and educating our youngest Australians. This is on top of supporting not one, not two, but three increases to the award wage of early childhood educators, as well as our tax cuts.

I have spoken to educators right across the country who have told me how much they love their job. Their dedication to children's wellbeing and children's development is on show at every single centre that I have visited across Australia. But they also tell me that love doesn't pay the bills. This wage increase will make a real and tangible difference for over 200,000 workers in Australia. Sia, an educator from Victoria, said this: 'Instead of searching for a second job, this pay increase will help me now pay rent and put food on my table.'

This 15 per cent wage increase means that an average ECEC educator will receive a pay rise of over $100 per week, increasing to over $150 a week from December 2025. An early childhood teacher gets an additional $166 a week, increasing to $249 a week from December 2025. This is a great outcome for a highly feminised workforce.

Unsurprisingly, yet disappointingly, the opposition doesn't understand how important this wage increase is for the sector. The opposition leader dismissed the wage increase as 'a few dollars a week' and refused to support it. The opposition leader would do well to go out and speak to ECEC workers—people like Karen, an educator in the opposition leader's home state of Queensland, who said that this will change people's lives. It means that early childhood educators who have been relying on Foodbank to feed their families won't have to do that anymore.

Every Australian, whether a parent, a grandparent, an aunt or an uncle—whether you know an early childhood educator or you are one—knows how important this work is. It's not just about wiping bums and noses. But it's only a Labor government that will deliver a fair and decent wage increase for early childhood workers.

## Economy

Ms LEY (Farrer—Deputy Leader of the Opposition) (14:26):  My question is to the Prime Minister. Last week, the RBA said:

… Public demand is forecast to be stronger than previously expected, reflecting recent public spending announcements by federal and state and territory governments … 

The Prime Minister dismissed this, claiming, 'That's not what they've said.' Why is the Prime Minister in denial that Labor's spending is causing homegrown inflation and keeping interest rates higher for longer?

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (14:27):  I thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition for her question. This is what the RBA governor, Michele Bullock, said last Thursday in Armidale:

… governments have a job to do and I have a job to do. My job and the Reserve Bank's job is to get inflation down. The governments have a different job. Their job is also to get inflation down, and they acknowledge that, but it's also to provide services and infrastructure for the Australian people. So, they need to do that at the same time as they need to focus on keeping inflation down …

That's precisely what we're doing. It's also consistent with what the governor told estimates in May, where she said:

… fiscal policy has been running a surplus for the last couple of years, so I'd say that has been helping the … inflation situation, if anything … 

I know for those opposite, a budget surplus is something that is foreign to them.

Ms Ley interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will cease interjecting.

Mr ALBANESE:  You may as well be talking in a different language. They promised a surplus in their first year and every year thereafter, and they produced none. None! We turned a $78 billion Liberal deficit into a $22 billion surplus, and then backed it up with a second surplus—that's on its way—as well.

This is also what Michele Bullock, the RBA governor, had to say about inflation: 'Inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022.' This is what she said on 6 August, last week. She spoke about international experience as well: 'We've seen from overseas experience how bumpy inflation can be on the way down and across the economy.' She had that to say as well. She's been very, very consistent, and we have been consistent. What we have been doing is making sure that we do continue to have inflationary pressure put down—

Mr Wallace interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The member for Fisher will cease interjecting.

Mr ALBANESE:  which is why we have halved it since we came to office. At the same time, we're not leaving people behind. We've given tax cuts to every Australian, something that the questioner here, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, said they would roll back. We await the Deputy Leader of the Opposition saying, during the election campaign, when it will be rolled back. When are you going to roll it back? That's what we want to know. So, get ready for whenever it's called; you stand up there and you say that you're going to roll back the tax cuts that we put in place, in order to support your ideological position, which is simply inconsistent— (Time expired)

## Early Childhood Education

Ms BELYEA (Dunkley) (14:30):  My question is to the Minister for Education. What has been the reaction to the Albanese Labor government's decision to increase early educator wages? And why is it important to support our early educator workforce?

Mr CLARE (Blaxland—Minister for Education) (14:30):  I thank my friend the sensational member for Dunkley for her question. Our early educators deserve a gold medal—

Honourable members interjecting—

Mr CLARE:  do you like that?—and silver, and bronze. They also deserve a pay rise, and that's what this government is delivering: a 15 per cent pay rise; that means an extra 100 bucks a week from December. We've already cut the cost of child care for more than a million Australian families, and this is the next step, lifting up the pay of the people who make all of this possible—some of the lowest paid workers in this country and some of our most important, the people who help ensure that our kids start school ready to learn.

The US president often makes the point that children who go to preschool are 50 per cent more likely to then go on to college or to university. So, this isn't 'baby city'; this is early education. It's not about changing nappies; it's about changing lives. And what we announced last week is not just a 15 per cent pay rise. We announced two things: a 15 per cent pay rise for workers and also a 4.4 per cent fee cap to keep prices down for parents. It's a pay rise for more than 200,000 workers, and we're keeping prices down for more than a million Australian families. It's a win for workers and it's a win for parents. That's why everyone has backed it—except for the Liberal Party, which has attacked it.

There's no better example of that than the ramblings of that policy heavyweight Senator Gerard Rennick, who, on Saturday, hopped onto Twitter and said that child care destroys the family unit. The truth is that it's units like that who destroy the Liberal Party 's credibility. It's comments like that that make you think that the modern Liberal Party thinks that women who have little kids shouldn't go back to work, shouldn't have a paid job. If awards were handed out for cookers, this bloke would win a Michelin star. If the opposition leader had any ticker, he would pull this bloke into line—maybe he would pull the plug on his computer—and then he would back this pay rise for some of the lowest paid and most important workers in this country. We want more kids to start school ready to learn. We want more kids to finish high school and then go on to TAFE and to university. We want a better and a fairer education system, and this is where it starts.

## Poverty

Dr RYAN (Kooyong) (14:34):  My question is for the Treasurer. One in eight Australians live in poverty. Helping them helps all of us. It means that more Australians can afford to pay their rent and their bills, to get to interviews and get a job, and to feed their kids and themselves. Eradicating poverty would transform their lives as well as our economy. Will you instruct the Productivity Commission to inquire into the economic cost of poverty to Australia?

Dr CHALMERS (Rankin—Treasurer) (14:34):  Thanks to the member for Kooyong for her question about an issue very near and dear not just to her heart but to mine and to everyone on this side of the House, and that is: how do we go about, in the most responsible way that we can, making life easier for the most vulnerable people in our community?

The honourable member, who follows these things closely, would know that the Productivity Commission has already, quite recently, put out what I thought was a really terrific piece of work about social mobility—intergenerational mobility—in our communities. For me, this really goes to the heart of the matter that the member for Kooyong raises for the House today, which is: how do we make sure that people can not just get by but get ahead, and how do we prevent intergenerational disadvantage—which exists in many of our communities, including, if we're honest about it, communities like the one that I represent—from cascading through the generations? That's the work that the PC did. I want to thank the chair of the PC, Danielle Wood, and her colleagues for doing that important piece of work, because I think the PC has given us an important reminder about how much we cherish intergenerational mobility in this country but also about how we can't be complacent, particularly at the very bottom end of the income and wealth scale and also when it comes to the very top.

I know that the honourable member's question is well motivated, and I know it's well informed by the work that the PC has already done. We're not contemplating another study of that kind, in addition to the one that the PC has just released, but we are proudly, as a Labor government, very focused on the most vulnerable people in our society and on that question of intergenerational disadvantage. It's why we increased JobSeeker and the working age payments, working closely with my colleagues here on the front bench. It's why energy bill relief has happened a couple of times. It's why we've made sure that everyone gets a tax cut, not just people who are already doing a bit better than others. It's why I work closely with the minister on a whole program of addressing place based disadvantage in our communities where that is the biggest challenge. It's why we've supported increases to the minimum wage. It's why we're supporting decent pay rises for early childhood educators and others as well. It's why we've expanded paid parental leave. There are a whole range of things that we are doing. I could go on about those things that we are doing.

We are proud of the progress that we've made for Australia's most vulnerable people, but we don't pretend that every challenge in our economy and, more importantly, in our society has been fixed. That's why the work of the PC about mobility is so important to us, and that's why, in every single budget, we do what we can to help the most vulnerable people in our country.

## Early Childhood Education

Ms LAWRENCE (Hasluck) (14:37):  My question is to the Prime Minister. How is the Albanese Labor government helping to ensure childcare workers are valued and paid fairly, and what has been the response?

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (14:37):  I thank the member for Hasluck for her question and for welcoming me last Friday morning into a childcare centre in her electorate, where we were able to speak directly with the workers who do such an extraordinary job in looking after our youngest Australians. They are there not just to mind children but to educate them both in terms of early learning and through the social interaction that comes from that engagement.

That's why, last week, I was very proud that we announced the 15 per cent increase in pay for these essential workers: 10 per cent in December this year and five per cent in December next year—a total increase of $155, extra money in their pocket. This is added to by the fact that all of them will benefit as well from tax cuts that we've put in place—tax cuts of which they would otherwise have got either none, if they were part-time workers, or very little, if they were working full time.

Early educators do an extraordinary job, and this wage increase will make sure that the system doesn't continue to see people leave it because they can't afford to stay there. This is good for workers, good for children, good for families and good for our national economy, because early learning also allows people either to re-enter the workforce after having a child or to stay or to work one or two extra days above what they would otherwise have done. Claire, at my electorate in Leichhardt, where we launched the announcement last week, said this: 'It will help tremendously. It means that the teachers who are really passionate about the industry will stay. They don't have to leave.' And indeed it will. But of course those opposite refuse to embrace this change. They say they support workers, but there's always a 'but'. 'I don't oppose helping families, but—' and they go on to say why they're against it with their relentless negativity.

The minister's already spoken about our friend Senator Rennick, personally endorsed by the Leader of the Opposition earlier this term in a preselection battle in the LNP where he spoke about institutionalised childcare as a sacred cow for the Labor Party. He said it 'destroyed the family unit', and he went on to say it 'brainwashed children early with the woke mind virus'. I mean, this stuff is just extraordinary. It's from an elected senator, someone who actually gets to vote on legislation in this parliament. (Time expired)

## Inflation

Mr TAYLOR (Hume) (14:41):  My question is to the Treasurer. Independent economist Chris Richardson said last week's RBA statement was about as clear as they can be: there is extra budget spending in the system which is fuelling inflation. But the Treasurer said last week, 'I don't think that's what the statement says.' When will the Treasurer cut the spin and take responsibility for decisions that are driving up his homegrown inflation?

Dr CHALMERS (Rankin—Treasurer) (14:41):  I take responsibility for the decisions that we've made in our budget and I do that proudly. I take responsibility for the cost-of-living help that they don't support. I take responsibility for the responsible economic management which is completely foreign to them. I take responsibility for the surpluses that we have delivered that they weren't capable of delivering in nine attempts.

Now, if the shadow Treasurer knew what he was talking about, he would know that the Governor of the Reserve Bank, as the Prime Minister said a moment ago, has said very clearly, 'My personal view is that they're doing what they can in this area.' I think that the Governor of the Reserve Bank saying that we are doing what we can with our surpluses and the way we've designed our cost-of-living help is an important thing to factor in. You can't believe a word that the shadow Treasurer says about this.

Mr Taylor interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The member for Hume will cease interjecting.

Dr CHALMERS:  To pick up the bizarre logic of the shadow Treasurer: first of all, obviously, a net additional spend of $10 billion this year is not the primary determinant of prices in a $2.6 trillion economy. I shouldn't have to explain that to the shadow Treasurer. But even if we accepted that point, by the shadow Treasurer's bizarre logic about that $10 billion additional spend, which is a fraction of the additional spend that they had in 2022, he is taking responsibility. When inflation was higher and rising faster, those opposite spent more in their last budget.

The SPEAKER:  The Treasurer will pause. The member for Hume on a point of order?

Mr Taylor:  Relevance. The question was about the Treasurer's hopeless decisions that are driving up—

The SPEAKER:  Resume your seat. The Treasurer was asked about the RBA statement and about—

Mr Taylor interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! Don't talk over me when I'm dealing with your point of order. Trust me; you won't be here to hear the answer. The Treasurer was asked about taking responsibility regarding the issue of inflation, so he is being directly relevant. I'm going to listen carefully to him to make sure that he is being relevant to the question. The Treasurer has the call.

Dr CHALMERS:  We've turned two big Liberal deficits into two big Labor surpluses. We've designed our cost-of-living relief to put downward pressure on inflation, not upward pressure, and we are providing the responsible economic management that they were incapable of delivering in nine years in office.

We know what's really going on here. What's really going on here is that the shadow Treasurer was disappointed and embarrassed last week because he desperately wants interest rates to go up, and they didn't. He desperately wanted underlying inflation the week before that to go up, and instead it went down. While the rest of Australia was cheering for our Olympians, he was cheering for high interest rates and more pain. He wants higher inflation and he wants higher interest rates, because he doesn't want anyone to notice that, in the third year of a three-year term, he still doesn't have any costed or credible economic policies. He still won't come clean on the $315 billion in cuts that he says the economy needs. He still won't tell people what that means for Medicare, for pensions or for the economy more broadly. 

On this side of the House, we acknowledge that people are doing it tough. We are helping with the cost of living, we are repairing the budget and we are making our economy more resilient at the same time. Those opposite did none of those things. (Time expired)

Mr Taylor interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! The member for Hume is warned!

## Economy

Mrs PHILLIPS (Gilmore) (14:45):  My question is to the Treasurer. How is the Albanese Labor government's responsible economic management right for the conditions we confront, and what approaches have the government rejected?

Dr CHALMERS (Rankin—Treasurer) (14:45):  I thank the wonderful member for her question. The two big influences on our economy are global uncertainty and cost-of-living pressures, and they are combining to slow our economy at the same time. Our economic plan anticipated this balance of risks and we are responding with cost-of-living relief, budget repair and investments to make our economy more resilient, as I said a moment ago. The extreme volatility we have seen in global markets in recent weeks is a real warning against complacency. Inflation is sticky and stubborn and more persistent than we would like. We are seeing that around the world, including in Europe, where inflation has just gone up again, and in the US and Canada, where it zigged and zagged on the way down. 

There is no shortage of challenges in our economy, but we have made some welcome progress in the last two years, as the Prime Minister said a moment ago. Inflation has halved on our watch; wages growth has doubled; almost a million jobs have been created, which is a record; there are tax cuts for every taxpayer; and, despite all of that—tax cuts and energy relief—we have still turned two big Liberal deficits into two big Labor surpluses. Those opposite do not want anyone in Australia to remember that, when we came to office, inflation had a six in front of it—and now it has a three in front of it. Rates were already rising when we came to office, wages were stagnant, the deficits were much bigger and the budget was weighed down by rorts, waste and debt—and the Shadow Treasurer was the poster child for all of that. That is their record.

Mr Taylor interjecting—

Dr CHALMERS:  The Shadow Treasurer, as I said a moment ago, was disappointed and embarrassed last week because he desperately wanted interest rates to go up and they did not. He desperately wanted underlying inflation to go up the week before and instead it went down. It was the same with the quarterly read on homegrown non-tradable inflation. As I said, most people in Australia are cheering for the interest rates and for the cost-of-living pressures to be alleviated in the coming months. The Shadow Treasurer wants life to get harder for people. 

Mr Taylor interjecting—

Dr CHALMERS:  That's because he does not want anyone to say, 'Hang on a minute, Shadow Treasurer; you say there should be $315 billion worth of cuts, but what are they? What does it mean for pensions and indexation? What does it mean for Medicare? What does it mean for the broader economy?' He still cannot tell us why they opposed tax cuts for every taxpayer or energy bill relief and how they will roll back the cost-of-living help. He still cannot tell us how much the nuclear reactors will cost or how he will pay to reinstate the old stage three tax cuts. 

Mr Taylor interjecting—

Dr CHALMERS:  We acknowledge that people are doing it tough. We are helping where we can in the most responsible way at the same time as we deliver these surpluses. If they had their way, inflation would be higher, interest rates would be higher, wages would be lower and there would be absolutely no help for people doing it tough.

The SPEAKER:  Before I call the member for Durack, the Shadow Treasurer interjected eight times during that answer. We are starting this fortnight with a lesson to everyone. There are consequences for actions. You were on a warning and you will now leave the chamber under 94(a).

The member for Hume then left the chamber.

Dr Chalmers interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The Treasurer is now warned!

## Makarrata Commission

Ms PRICE (Durack—Opposition Whip) (14:49):  My question is to the Prime Minister. Has the Prime Minister ruled out the creation of a Makarrata commission to oversee truth-telling and treaty? If so, why is there still money in the budget to create one?

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (14:49):  I thank the member for Durack for her ongoing commitment to Indigenous Australians and for her interest in these issues and the constructive role that she wishes to play. I did indeed speak at the Garma Festival. I attended the Garma Festival along with the education minister, the social services minister, the Indigenous affairs minister, the member for Barton, the member for Lingiari, the member for Solomon and many representatives of state governments. We were the only federal members who were there. It was an important gathering to discuss with First Nations people a way forward to close the gap. What we know is that, when it comes to closing the gap, we are not achieving the outcomes that I'm sure everyone here would want to see. We need to reduce the suicide rates. We need to reduce the incarceration rates. We need to reduce the disparities in health and education that exist between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.

The theme of this year's festival was 'Fire, Strength, Renewal'. Fire is something that Yunupingu—the Leader of the Opposition attended his funeral—

Opposition members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! Members on my left! The manager is entitled to raise a point of order, and he shall do so.

Mr Fletcher:  On relevance, it was a very tight question: has the Prime Minister ruled out the creation of a makarrata commission to oversee truth-telling and treaty? If so, why is there still money in the budget to create one? The Prime Minister should be directed to answer the question.

The SPEAKER:  I'm listening carefully. I want to make sure the Prime Minister is on topic. He's talking about the visit to Garma. I'm assuming, or hoping, he will continue his answer regarding the question, which was about the makarrata commission for truth-telling. He has had a preamble. I invite him to return to the question.

Mr ALBANESE:  Indeed. 'Makarrata' is a Yolngu word—the Yolngu are the people who host the Garma Festival each year—for a coming together after struggle. No-one can say there hasn't been a struggle in this country with Indigenous Australians when you have Closing the Gap at that point. Coming together means actually sitting down and discussing the issues of how we move forward together. Those opposite might want to seek to continue to have division. What I'm seeking to do—and I spoke at the Garma Festival about economic empowerment—is to search, along with the new Minister for Indigenous Affairs, for ways in which we can come together. That is what makarrata is: coming together. I seek for Australians to come together in order to advance the interests of Indigenous Australians, and I invite those opposite to stop with the attempts to divide and try to come together in order to close the gap, because that is our objective.

During the referendum that was held last year, I was asked a range of questions on multiple occasions. I was asked whether the Voice would affect interest rates, defence bases, nuclear powered subs and a whole range of issues. I was also asked about treaty, and at that I continually indicated the same answer. I referred to the same answer before the referendum as afterwards: that that is not the focus that we have. (Time expired)

## Defence

Ms MILLER-FROST (Boothby) (14:54):  My question is to the Deputy Prime Minister. How is the Albanese Labor government investing in defence to keep Australians safe after a decade of mismanagement in defence?

Mr MARLES (Corio—Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence) (14:54):  Last Monday I signed, on behalf of the government, the AUKUS naval nuclear propulsion agreement with the United States and the United Kingdom at Australia's embassy in Washington, DC. This is a foundational part of the legal underpinning of the announcement that was made by our three countries in San Diego last year, and it is another critical step forward in delivering AUKUS.

When we came to power, AUKUS was really not much more than a thought bubble, but since then we have been turning it into a reality. We have determined the actual pathway by which Australia will acquire a nuclear-powered submarine capability. We have now passed multiple tranches of legislation which have included the establishment of the Australian Submarine Agency and, along with legislation that was passed by the US Congress last year, we have created a seamless defence industrial base between our two countries, which is so critical to delivering this project. Most importantly, we have provided the increased funding in the budget to deliver AUKUS and much, much more—funding which those opposite did not provide. All of this has happened because what the Albanese government says, it does, and this stands in stark contrast to those opposite.

The shadow minister is reported in the media today as saying that on the on hand he would like to see an increase in war stocks by 2026 but, on the other, he is refusing to commit to an increase in defence spending against what those opposite promised in the last election—which, to remind everyone, is $50 billion less over the decade than what this government has in the budget right now. The difference between the rhetoric and the reality is profound, but it should not be a surprise, because this was the business model of the Leader of Opposition when he the defence minister. He oversaw $42 billion worth of unfunded defence announcements in addition to 28 different projects which were running 97 years overtime.

The complete dysfunction in the defence delivery, combined with the historic overprogramming of the defence budget, is the literal last will and testament of the worst defence government that this country has ever seen. They were terrible in government. Today, we see they are no better in opposition. The Albanese government is doing the detailed work making the difficult decisions to deliver AUKUS and keep Australians safe. (Time expired)

## Climate Change: Agriculture

Mr LITTLEPROUD (Maranoa—Leader of the Nationals) (14:57):  My question is for the minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Has the minister's department modelled how much farmers will pay of the $2.3 billion Treasury has estimated in extra compliance costs for compulsory sustainability and scope 3 reporting the government is introducing? What will be the flow-on cost to families at the checkout?

Ms COLLINS (Franklin—Minister for Housing, Minister for Homelessness and Minister for Small Business) (14:57):  I thank the member opposite for his question. The member opposite knows we are working on a plan in terms of sustainability and climate change for the agriculture sector, and that plan has been worked on for some time. Also, when it comes to food prices—

Honourable members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! The Leader of the Nationals has asked a question.

Ms COLLINS:  and competition, we all know what their policy is: divestiture of supermarket. They don't have anything over there. We are investing and making sure that we put downward pressure on food prices—that's why we funded CHOICE, that's why we did the ACCC inquiry and that's why Doctor Craig Emerson has conducted a review of the food and groceries code of conduct.

Opposition members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The Leader of The Nationals will resume his seat.

## Cost of Living

Ms COKER (Corangamite) (14:58):  My question is to the Minister for Industry and Science. How is the Albanese Labor government's Future Made in Australia plan helping Australian families deal with cost-of-living pressures, and what are the consequences of opposing this plan?

Mr HUSIC (Chifley—Minister for Industry and Science) (14:59):  I thank the member for her question because she knows an important way for Australians to deal with cost-of-living pressures is to hold down a secure, well-paying job. The bulk of manufacturing jobs are full time and pay above-average weekly earnings. Our Future Made in Australia plans champion Australian manufacturing, as does our $400 million Australian Industry Growth Program.

We got to back the efforts of small manufacturers to grow well-paying jobs with the announcement last week of the first grants from the IGP. Li-S Energy in the Corangamite electorate secured one of those grants to help with the commercialisation, development and production of its lithium-sulphur batteries. These batteries are lighter and more powerful and are targeted for use in aviation and defence. Li-S employs 25 people in Geelong and Brisbane and is now looking to expand. We set up the IGP to help emerging manufacturers to grow, be it Li-S in Corangamite, be it Cauldron Molecules in Calare, be it Forager Automation in Bonner, be it Brandsec in Melbourne or be it Electrogenics Laboratories in Bradfield. So we are saying yes to Australian jobs—secure, well-paying jobs in manufacturing. We're saying yes to more products made right here in this country and yes to workers earning more and keeping more of what they earn.

The question is: what about those opposite? It's always no, always negative—no to our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund, no to energy price relief for Australian manufacturers and no to cost-of-living tax relief for workers. And here's the other one: when we announced our Future Made in Australia initiatives in our May budget, the Leader of the Opposition described our plans to scale up more work onshore as 'corporate welfare' and 'billions for billionaires'. Tough talk! But last week, on his way to Western Australia, it seemed like that courage evaporated over the Nullarbor, because, when he had to eyeball WA businesses keen to leverage off our announced production credits, the Leader of the Opposition did what he normally does when he is under pressure. He said, 'We'll have more to say about that later.' Tough guy! Where did you go? He's tough on the east coast, and then it just diminishes on the west coast. It just disappears. The tune changes. Their hearts are not in it. They will not back Australian manufacturing. They saw off 100,000 manufacturing jobs when they were in office, chased out the car industry and now only ever talk about manufacturing to talk it down.

## Gambling Advertising

Ms DANIEL (Goldstein) (15:02):  To the Prime Minister: Goldstein constituents and other Australians tell me they want all gambling ads banned, yet it's been reported that you're planning only a partial ban. Rod Glover, husband of the late Peta Murphy, said today:

Her main argument is really simple: in a really hard trade-off, you've got to put people first and think about what kind of future you want to create.

Prime Minister, will you reconsider your reported position and honour Peta's legacy by banning all gambling ads? 

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (15:03):  I thank the member for Goldstein for her question. There's a fair bit of hypothetical in there about what our alleged position was, but we are working through these issues and the government has made it very clear that the status quo regarding the saturation of gambling advertising, particularly where children are exposed to it, is untenable. The Minister for Communications and the Minister for Social Services are getting on with tackling gambling harm comprehensively, and we're doing that in a way that will ensure that there aren't unintended consequences of it. In today's world, where people have access to information instantaneously on devices that they have—including the member for Goldstein and others in this chamber here—where things can just pop up and be received, we want to make sure that any measures do not have unintended consequences, and we're taking a comprehensive approach, recognising that this is a complex issue.

The government has already delivered the most significant reform that has been done. We've done more in two years than those opposite did in the previous nine. We have delivered the most significant online wagering and harm reduction initiatives of the past decade. We have established mandatory customer ID verification for online wagering. We have banned the use of credit cards for online wagering. We have forced online wagering companies to send their customers monthly activity statements outlining wins and losses. We have introduced new evidence-based taglines that people will have seen—very different from the 'Gamble responsibly' that used to be there. We have provided direct funding for specialist financial counselling to support people affected by problem gambling. We have introduced nationally consistent staff training. We have introduced new minimum classifications for videogames, and we have launched BetStop—the National Self-Exclusion Register.

I have every respect for Rod Glover. He has been a friend of mine for a long period of time. He is a great Australian who has had to deal with the tragedy of losing his life partner, something that is felt by so many people in this chamber—and not just on this side of the chamber, I acknowledge. I note some people like John Howard are entering this debate. If only he had been in a position to have some influence over public policy over this time! But the entire time that he occupied my seat, he did absolutely nothing about any of these issues. (Time expired)

## Housing

Mr NEUMANN (Blair) (15:06):  My question is to the Minister for Housing and Homelessness. How is Labor's Homes for Australia play helping address the housing pressures Australians face, and what is standing in the way?

Ms O'NEIL (Hotham—Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Cyber Security) (15:06):  The member for Blair is right: Australians are doing it tough right now and housing is a big part of that story. I've been the minister in this portfolio now for two weeks, and I am very honoured to progress the enormously important work of the member for Franklin in her time in this role. I have spent a lot of time since I became minister speaking to people directly affected by this problem. I have spoken to a mum with a child with disability who has been forced to move house in the middle of her child's school year. I have spoken to renters whose landlords will not fix black mould in their homes and whose rents are rising too often and too fast. I have spoken to a lot of young people who are worried that they will be locked out of home ownership forever, and I have spoken to a woman who was a victim of long-term homelessness and talked to her about how housing is helping her rebuild her life.

Our country today is led by a prime minister whose entire life trajectory was reshaped by secure housing and, unsurprisingly, we have a bold and ambitious housing agenda. For the first time in a decade, we have a Commonwealth government in this country saying, 'We have responsibilities here and we can make a difference to this problem.' The Commonwealth can't solve this problem alone, but it is not going to get solved without us. That is why our government, in just two years in office, has invested $32 billion in helping Australians with this crisis.

Opposition members interjecting—

Ms O'NEIL:  I hear some murmurs from those opposite, and I will remind them that our government invested more just in our last budget than the entire nine years that those opposite where in office. Our government also recognises that we have a good long-term solution to this problem but we are in crisis right now. That is why our government has made the biggest increase to Commonwealth rent assistance in 30 years—two back-to-back increases to Commonwealth rent assistance that will see Australians get up to 40 per cent increases on those payments. 

We have two really important initiatives that are part of the puzzle here sitting in the Senate—one which will help more low-income Australians get into the housing market and one which will help build more rental homes for our country. Would you believe that both of these initiatives are being blocked by the Liberals and the Greens in the Senate! One of my observations is that there is a hell of a lot of politics being played in this debate by people who are seeking to get a political outcome. My goal and the government's goal in this debate is to make sure that we focus not on the politics, not on the politicians and not on the personalities, but on the fact that we have a generations-long housing crisis in this country—and our government is here to help.

## Makarrata Commission

Mr DUTTON (Dickson—Leader of the Opposition) (15:09):  My question is to the Prime Minister. Has the Prime Minister committed to anyone that he supports the establishment of a Makarrata commission?

Mr ALBANESE (Grayndler—Prime Minister) (15:09):  I'm pleased to see that the Leader of the Opposition is focused on the cost of living. What we've said on makarrata is that we'll continue to engage. We held a referendum last year which wasn't successful.

Mr Pasin:  You lost!

Mr ALBANESE:  That's right. It wasn't successful. And what happens is that you accept that, you accept responsibility for it—something foreign to those opposite. We can accept our responsibility. You accept your responsibility for saying that it would have an impact on interest rates and on nuclear subs.

Mr Dutton:  Mr Speaker—

The SPEAKER:  Has the Prime Minister concluded his answer?

Mr ALBANESE:  Yes.

## Energy

Ms SITOU (Reid) (15:10):  My question is to the Minister for Climate Change and Energy. How is the Albanese Labor government acting to reduce the cost of energy? What policies leading to higher power prices has the government rejected?

Mr BOWEN (McMahon—Minister for Climate Change and Energy) (15:10):  I thank my honourable friend for her question and, of course, her leadership when it comes to climate activism in her electorate. Since the parliament last sat, the $300 of energy bill relief from the Albanese government has been applied to energy bills across the country. Of course, that comes along with our tax cuts which came into force on 1 July to provide cost-of-living relief to Australians today, when they need it—not in decades time but today, because that's when Australians are feeling the pressure. They're feeling the pressure right now, and so the relief is flowing right now.

In the medium term, we're also continuing with the task of rolling out the cheapest form of energy, which is renewable energy. While both sides of the House agree that renewables play an important role in Australia's energy mix, we on this side of the House have faith in renewables, which now provide cheaper energy than nonrenewables. To be fair, that was a statement by the member for Fairfax in 2017, when the Liberal Party actually believed in renewable energy and recognised it was the cheapest form of energy available. The member for Fairfax said that renewable energy is the cheapest form of energy. And it's not just the member for Fairfax who thinks that; real experts do as well. We see it from Daniel Westerman, the Chief Executive of AEMO, who has said:

… renewable generation connected with transmission and distribution, supported by hydro, batteries and gas, is the lowest-cost way to supply electricity to homes and businesses … 

That's exactly what this government is doing—renewables supported by gas, supported by storage and supported by transmission. 

The honourable member asked me what policies we have rejected. Well, I'll use the term 'policy' lightly, because what we've seen from the opposition is the announcement of seven sites. That's it—no costings, no details, no number of gigawatts, just seven nuclear power sites. I've seen more detail on the back of a cornflakes packet than we have in the opposition's nuclear policy. To assist those opposite, though, we can provide some details for them. They've said that the power that they will generate on these seven nuclear sites will replace the power from the coal-fired power stations that are on those sites—that is, 11 gigawatts, or 3.7 per cent of Australia's energy needs. That's 3.7 per cent, at a cost somewhere between $116 billion—that would be the cheapest—and $600 billion, based on the experience in the United Kingdom. That is between $10.5 billion and $54.5 billion a gigawatt. That's a lot of dollars for not many gigawatts. Well done to the Leader of the Opposition, who says his plan to reduce the cost of power is, in decades time, to introduce a form of power which is $55 billion a gigawatt. That's $55 billion a gigawatt. That's their genius plan. Well, we are not going to be distracted by these plans. We are going to continue with real cost-of-living relief today. (Time expired)

## Workplace Relations

Ms SPENDER (Wentworth) (15:14):  My question is for the Minister representing the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. The construction industry is different. We've lived through 11,000 pages of royal commission reports, but, once again, shocking allegations of corruption and criminality and flatlining housing productivity over the last 20 years. The ABCC didn't stop some of these, but I believe, as many others do, that the industry is different and needs a different oversight mechanism. Will you consider a body or framework that brings together industry, unions and people across this parliament to truly clean up the industry?

Mr BURKE (Watson—Minister for the Arts, Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for Cyber Security, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Leader of the House) (15:14):  I thank the member for Wentworth for the question. The oversight mechanism that the government is following through on is what we introduced into the Senate today: to place the CFMEU into administration. The reasons for that are very strong. The three different options, which are to place the organisation into administration, establish a watchdog of some sort, or go down the path of deregistration, all involve fundamentally different outcomes. First of all, going down the pathway of administration allows someone to be in charge who can make sure they look at official by official and say, 'That person should not be there,' who can make sure that the union runs for its members and who can look at the money trail and say, 'That money shouldn't be spent in a particular way.' It is highly interventionist, which is only something that you do in extraordinary circumstances, which are the circumstances we face.

The experience of a watchdog has been all the things we don't want. The first is the current leadership, which has caused the highest level of concern—in particular, some from the Victorian branch—and rose to power while the ABCC was there. That was when they came to power. In 2017, it was admitted by Senator Cash that she knew that Nigel Hadgkiss had been breaching the Fair Work Act while he was heading the watchdog. Labour productivity—

An opposition member interjecting—  

Mr BURKE:  Referred to in the question. Labour productivity fell in each of the years prior to the pandemic. Every year the ABCC was there, productivity went down. You had an organisation that, instead of trying to deliver on productivity, was obsessed with flags and stickers and would pull down a health and safety sign if it had a union sticker on it. A judge of the Federal Court described it by saying:

I hold the clear view that this is a case where the ABCC should be publicly exposed as having wasted public money without a proper basis for doing so …

Since we abolished the ABCC, the number of days lost to industrial action fell by 30 per cent—fell by 30 per cent! And when those opposite start calling out now about wanting a cop on the beat—

Mrs Phillips interjecting—

Mr Wallace interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order, the member for Durack. The member for Fisher is now warned.

Mr BURKE:  they forget that the ABCC was incapable of dealing with any criminal issues. It only dealt with civil issues. It was incapable of that. Instead, the third option is the one that is not being put forward by the crossbench, as I understand it, but is being put forward by those opposite, which is to say, 'Why don't we have deregistration?' The answer is simple: which choices changed who should turn up to the commission to negotiate? Whether registered or not, you can still turn up to the commission. Under their proposal, the full leadership of the CFMEU would stay in power and could still negotiate—nothing would be fixed.

## Cybersecurity

Dr CHARLTON (Parramatta) (15:17):  My question is to the Minister for Cyber Security. What was the government's role in the response to the CrowdStrike outage?

Mr BURKE (Watson—Minister for the Arts, Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for Cyber Security, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Leader of the House) (15:18):  I thank the member for Parramatta for the question and acknowledge the work that he is now doing in assisting me in the cyber area. The outage that took place on Friday 19 July, caused by an update published by CrowdStrike, has been described as the biggest IT outage of all time. It ricocheted all around the world, including in Australia. It was not a cyberattack, but all the systems that had been put in place by my predecessor, the member for Hotham, were able to be tested and showed that Australia is far better prepared for cyberattacks than comparable nations. In establishing the National Cyber Security Coordinator, we established that this would be used for the National Coordination Mechanism.

CrowdStrike brought down systems across the whole country and around the world. It left travellers stranded at airports. It posed issues for supermarket supply chains. It disrupted countless businesses. Every single one of us had people in our electorates unable to get money and purchase goods because of how this had interfered with Australian systems. Within three hours of the CrowdStrike update being published, the government had convened the National Coordination Mechanism.

Members will be familiar with the mechanism but not historically with its involvement with cyber. Anyone who's held the emergency service portfolio is aware of the way the National Coordination Mechanism brings in who is relevant to each crisis when it happens, gets them all together and starts working it through, together, through the leadership of the government. It's what we use, since the change of government, for natural disasters, cyber incidents and threats to critical infrastructure.

As I said, the first meeting was convened within three hours of the update going out. It was chaired by the deputy secretary of the Department of Home Affairs, Cyber and Security Group. It included representatives from the company CrowdStrike itself, a wide range of Australian state and territory government representatives and key industry representatives. Seven meetings like this continued over the following days. The process was led by staff from my department, including the National Cyber Security Coordinator, a position that did not exist before the change of government, led by Lieutenant General Michelle McGuinness. It found ways to deal with the long tail of consequences that stem from an outage of that scale.

All of this was possible only because we changed the government. If those opposite had still been in, there'd be no cabinet minister to deal with threats, there'd be no dedicated office within my department, and the National Coordination Mechanism would not be available for cyber. (Time expired)

## Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union

Mr SUKKAR (Deakin) (15:21):  My question is to the Minister for Housing. Has CFMEU corruption and lawless behaviour added to construction and housing costs for everyday Australians?

Ms O'NEIL (Hotham—Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Cyber Security) (15:21):  I thank the member opposite for his question. We have a construction union in our country which has become riddled with corruption and wrongdoing, and our government is taking the strongest possible action to reset that union. Today in the Senate the government introduced legislation that will allow the Minister for Industrial Relations to appoint an administrator who will have sweeping powers to do what is needed to be done to clean up this union.

The SPEAKER:  The member for Deakin on a point of order?

Mr Sukkar:  My question was very tight. It was just asking the minister whether the CFMEU's corruption and lawless behaviour has added to housing costs for everyday Australians.

The SPEAKER:  It was a tight question, and the minister has had 30 seconds as a preamble. She'll need to make sure her answer is directly relevant. I appreciate that the member wants a yes or a no, or perhaps a figure. Under the standing orders, I can't compel the minister to answer a certain way. But having some context given now, she's going to have to return to the question or resume her seat.

Ms O'NEIL:  Of course. I've talked about the action the government is taking, and I do want to make the point that this is stronger action than anything that was done by those opposite in the almost decade they were in power, despite all the complaining that went on.

We have a housing crisis in our country which has been 40 years in the making, and for a long time the Commonwealth stepped right out of this policy area. This issue is too important for our citizens—

Mr Sukkar:  Mr Speaker—

The SPEAKER:  You had a point of order. The member for Deakin is obviously raising another point of order.

Mr Sukkar:  Yes, the minister is defying your ruling. She is not answering—

The SPEAKER:  No, resume your seat. I'm trying to help the member. The minister needs to return to the question or she will be sat down. To simply talk about what is happening in—

Opposition members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! Members on my left! The member is entitled to ask a question. It was a very tight question. Historical context—we're past that point. If the minister can't answer the question or doesn't want to add extra information, that's okay, but she's got one final chance here. Otherwise, I'll ask her to resume her seat.

Ms O'NEIL:  Sure. I've talked about the strong action the government is taking. There is analysis that shows impacts on residential construction. There are experts in industry that say it has no impact on residential construction. The point I would make is that the policy fix is exactly the same. We need to take this union and clean it up. The activity in this union is dragging down not only the union itself but in fact the reputation of the union movement in our country, and that is why our government takes this so seriously. I would say again: the opposition had almost 10 years that they were in power to do something about this problem. Instead it took until we came to government to make sure we clean up this union once and for all.

Honourable members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  The Leader of the Opposition on the point of order?

Mr Dutton:  The Prime Minister made an unparliamentary remark, and he should withdraw it.

Honourable members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Order! Members on my right. The Minister for Social Services. The Minister for Education. If the Prime Minister has made an unparliamentary remark—

Honourable members interjecting—

The SPEAKER:  Okay. Order! The member for Macarthur was on his feet. We'll hear from the member for Macarthur.

## Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

Dr FREELANDER (Macarthur) (15:25):  My question is to the Minister for Health and Aged Care. What action is the Albanese Labor government taking to make medicines cheaper? Why is this action needed, and how are new listings on the PBS improving the health of Australians?

Mr BUTLER (Hindmarsh—Minister for Health and Aged Care and Deputy Leader of the House) (15:26):  I thank the terrific member for Macarthur for his question. Australia, as he knows, has one of the best medicine systems in the world, underpinned by the PBS, which, of course, is another great Labor legacy opposed at the time by the Liberal Party. The PBS ensures that Australians get access to the best cutting-edge medicines available anywhere in the world and at affordable prices. In just two years, we have made 200 new or expanded listings to that PBS.

This month we expanded access to Trikafta to children under the age of five years who are living with cystic fibrosis. A new child is born in Australia with CF every four days, and, as a long-time paediatrician, the member for Macarthur knows better than anyone in this chamber just how devastating that condition is for those kids and for their families. Trikafta is simply amazing and its impact is almost immediate. Ashley, who is the mother of a four-year-old boy, Heath, said at the time we listed this:

A few people have said today, what does this mean to us? In my family, it means hope … we just can't wait to keep planning the long life for Heath that we know he's going to have.

But it's also expensive. Indeed, without PBS listing, this medicine costs as much as $250,000 every year. From this month, though, an additional 330 kids every year will get access to this new medicine at affordable PBS prices—PBS prices that we have been making even cheaper in the two years that we've been a government. We have slashed the maximum amount that pensioners pay by 25 per cent. That's the biggest cut to the price of medicines in the 75-year of the PBS. We are finally allowing doctors to issue 60-day supplies of common medicines for ongoing health conditions. Of course, in May, the Treasurer froze the price of PBS medicines for up to five years—a measure which in and of itself will save patients as much as half a billion dollars over the coming five years. We are determined to keep making medicines cheaper because it's good for the hip pocket, obviously, but it's also good for Australians' health.

The Leader of the Opposition has always taken a different view of this, as Australians will very well remember. He was a member of the government which, back in 2005, under John Howard, jacked up the price of medicines by almost $5 a script. He then tried to do the same again, by another $5 a script, when he was the Minister for Health in 2014. Of course, in this term of parliament, he has opposed all of our cheaper-medicines policies. That's what you would get again from this man: services always going down, prices always going up.

Mr Albanese:  I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.