# Senate 2024-02-06

## Taxation

Senator BIRMINGHAM (South Australia—Leader of the Opposition in the Senate) (14:00):  My question is to the minister representing the Prime Minister, Senator Wong. Minister, rather than using the weasel words we've become so accustomed to from Labor ministers of, 'We have no plans,' which the Australian public now know will precipitate yet another Labor broken promise, can you, and will the Prime Minister, categorically rule out any change or changes that limit the use of negative gearing or franking credits by Australians? 

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:00):  It says something that the opposition is so interested in talking about what the government is not doing, because, of course, they can't talk about what the government is doing because that particular negative campaign has fallen flat, hasn't it, President? The reality is: those opposite are desperate to find another front because, after a lot of huffing and puffing, they're now backing Prime Minister Anthony Albanese's tax plan. That is what they are doing, so they're desperate now to talk about what we are not doing instead of what we are doing. We have made our position on those which—

Senator Birmingham:  Australians are scared about what you might do!

Senator WONG:  Which promise might you break?

Opposition senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! Senator Wong, please resume your seat. Order on my left! Senator Cash. Minister, please continue.

Senator WONG:  We are reforming the income tax system and providing income tax relief to Australians who are doing it tough. That's what we are doing; that is our focus. We are not looking at other changes in the tax system; we are looking at the changes in the income tax system. The reason we are doing that is Labor MPs, Labor senators and ministers, have understood how important it is for us to respond to cost-of-living pressures.

Opposition senators interjecting—

Senator WONG:  I know you don't want to talk about cost-of-living pressures—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! I have Senator Birmingham on his feet. 

Senator Birmingham:  A matter of direct relevance: the question did not mention income tax. The question invited the minister, very clearly, to address community concerns on negative gearing and franking credits. The minister has not come near either of those two specific topics raised in the question. I ask you to draw her to the question.

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Wong, I will withdraw you—I'll draw you to Senator Birmingham's question.

Senator Birmingham:  Can you do that too? Withdrawing the call is an option!

Senator WONG:  Well, I hope not! That'd be interesting; I would have to accept it. We are not proposing any other changes in the areas that the senator has outlined. I again say to anybody listening: understand what is happening here. Those opposite have backed Anthony Albanese's tax plan. That's what they've done, and now they're trying to distract from it with another scare campaign. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Birmingham, a first supplementary? 

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator BIRMINGHAM (South Australia—Leader of the Opposition in the Senate) (14:03):  I note the continuation of the words Australians now know mean a backflip like 'not proposing any other changes at this stage' continue. Ministers, including the Prime Minister, have previously refused to explicitly rule out changing the taxation treatment of the family home. Will the minister and the Prime Minister categorically rule out applying capital gains tax or any other tax to the family home, or do the weasel words apply there too?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:04):  Here we go again: another day, another of Dutton's attempted scare campaigns. No, we are not proposing those tax changes either. The reality is everybody knows that the—

Senator McKenzie interjecting—

Senator WONG:  Do you know what is embarrassing? You're backing Albo. That's what's embarrassing for you. That's what you can't bear, Senator McKenzie, isn't it? After all that huffing and puffing, you've realised, 'Actually, Anthony Albanese got it right.' That's what you've realised. Now you've come in here and you've gone: 'Oh my goodness. We'd better come up with another scare campaign so that hopefully people won't notice that we're backing the Prime Minister.' You're backing a Labor prime minister's plan because you know he did it right. You know he got it right. So now you've got to try and find something else to fight about.

Senator Cash interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  When you've finished, Senator Cash, Senator Birmingham's on his feet.

Senator Birmingham:  Again, on direct relevance, could Minister Wong at least utter the words 'family home' in her answer?

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! The minister was being relevant. Minister, did you wish to finish?

Senator WONG:  We are not proposing any changes of the type you were describing. But I want to say again, everybody, I am so pleased that the opposition has finally understood that Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has got it right.

The PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Senator Wong.

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! I've had to call the chamber to order a number of times, particularly on my left. I've named senators, I've called you to order and you've ignored me. I expect you to respect my calls. Senator Birmingham, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator BIRMINGHAM (South Australia—Leader of the Opposition in the Senate) (14:06):  After the Prime Minister broke his promise made on more than a hundred occasions to not change the stage 3 tax cuts and broke his promise to not change superannuation tax arrangements, how can Australians believe a word of this minister or the Prime Minister when all they come out with are the weasel words 'we have no plans' or 'we are not proposing any changes at this time', when every time they've said that they go and break the promise afterwards?

Senator Carol Brown:  No cuts to the ABC, no cuts to the SBS!

The PRESIDENT:  I'm waiting to call Senator Wong. Senator Brown!

Senator Carol Brown:  All coming back to you.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Brown! I should not have had to call you twice. Minister Wong.

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:06):  If the opposition really believed that the Prime Minister's decision was so wrong, then they would vote against these tax cuts. They would vote against them and they would go to the next election with their deputy leader's policy of rolling back these changes—because, as soon as they vote for this, what we know is that they are agreeing that Prime Minister Anthony Albanese did the right thing by Australian workers.

## Taxation

Senator CICCONE (Victoria—Deputy Government Whip in the Senate) (14:07):  Hello, everyone. Happy New Year. Thank you very much, President, and it's good to be back. My question is to the Minister representing the Prime Minister, Senator Wong. Minister, the Albanese government recently announced that it will deliver tax cuts for every single Australian taxpayer. That's nearly 14 million people. Can the minister please explain to the Senate how federal Labor will deliver a bigger tax cut for Middle Australia, which will help the cost of living and build on our targeted relief while also not adding to inflation?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:08):  I thank Senator Ciccone for the question and I also welcome him back and take the opportunity, again, to congratulate him and Sarah on the beautiful Amato, who we had the pleasure of meeting yesterday, although he was asleep.

The Albanese government is delivering a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer. Our No. 1 priority is addressing inflation and cost-of-living pressures, and that is exactly what we are doing. These are tax cuts which help with the cost of living while making Australia's tax system fairer. And, just like the other measures that the government have introduced to assist people with the cost of living, our tax cuts won't add to inflation. Treasury's advice is very clear on that. We on this side have listened to the community and we have listened to Treasury, and this plan is the result. 

Labor is delivering fair and responsible tax cuts for all 13.6 million taxpayers. Senator Ruston may make funny noises over there about that, but having everybody get a tax cut, we reckon, isn't bad. Do you know what? Eleven-point-five million people will get a bigger tax cut—84 per cent of Australian taxpayers. This change means that taxpayers earning less than $45,000 will now receive a tax cut. An average worker on 73 grand will receive a tax cut of more than $1,500, and a person earning $100,000 will get a tax cut of nearly $2,200.

You see, we on this side are doing the right thing for the right reasons: more help for families, more help for communities under pressure from the cost of living, and a better deal for 5.8 million working women. Five point eight million working women will be better off as a result of the decisions of this government.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Ciccone, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator CICCONE (Victoria—Deputy Government Whip in the Senate) (14:10):  Minister, can you please also confirm that every Australian taxpayer, which does include our scientists, tradies, nurses, researchers, teachers, engineers, firefighters, hospitality workers, retail assistants and every other hardworking taxpayer in this country, will get a tax cut under the Albanese government's plan?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:10):  Under this plan every single taxpayer gets a tax cut, no matter what they earn.

Senator McKenzie interjecting—

Senator WONG:  I know that's hard for you, but that's what's going to happen. From pilots and police to tradies, couriers and counsellors, every hardworking taxpayer will get a tax cut. Ninety per cent of Australian working women will get a bigger tax cut. Ninety-seven per cent of childcare workers, disability carers and aged-care workers will get a bigger tax cut. Ninety-eight per cent of teachers will get a bigger tax cut. It's crystal clear that every taxpayer needs and deserves a meaningful tax cut. The fact is that wouldn't have happened under Scott Morrison's plan, but, under Prime Minister Anthony Albanese's plan, it will happen now. Labor wants people to earn more and to keep more of what they earn, and that is what this delivers.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Ciccone, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator CICCONE (Victoria—Deputy Government Whip in the Senate) (14:11):  I thank the minister for that response. Could the minister please also explain to the Senate what the response has been, not just from the public at large but also from experts, to the government's plan to deliver the tax cuts to every single taxpayer?

The PRESIDENT:  Before I call you, Senator Wong, I remind you to refer to people in the other place by their correct titles.

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:12):  Prime Minister?

The PRESIDENT:  Mr Morrison.

Senator WONG:  Sorry. Mr Morrison.

With a plan that delivers a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer—that's nearly 14 million Australians—it's no surprise it has been widely welcomed by the public, by experts and by economists. Unfortunately, those opposite seem to be very begrudgingly voting for it, realising belatedly that it is the right plan.

I would remind people that, when we first announced this plan to give every Australian taxpayer a tax cut, Deputy Leader of the Opposition Sussan Ley said they would 'absolutely roll these changes back'. Absolutely! What's happened to that? What happened to absolutely rolling them back? If you absolutely believed this was absolutely the wrong thing to do, then you would absolutely vote against it and absolutely go to the election to absolutely roll them back. You know this is the right plan. You know this is the right thing to do.

## Taxation

Senator HUME (Victoria) (14:13):  My question is to the Minister representing the Treasurer, Senator Gallagher. On 11 December last year, Treasury was instructed to undertake work that included changes to the stage 3 tax cuts. Following that instruction, the Prime Minister and the Treasurer stated at least a dozen times that they hadn't changed their position on the stage 3 tax cuts, including when the Prime Minister said, 'We're not reconsidering that position.' But we know now that the government was lying. After repeated—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume, withdraw.

Senator HUME:  Madam President, I am conscious—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume, you're not in a debate with me. I've asked you to withdraw. That's what I want you to do.

Senator HUME:  Madam President, I would say I'm not impugning a particular member of the government, but the government was lying.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume, I have just instructed you (1) to withdraw and (2) not to argue with me. Please follow my directions.

Senator HUME:  I won't argue with you, Madam President, other than to say that perhaps we could look at the standing orders about this sort of phrase about a collective.

Government senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order on my right! I am in charge of the chamber, and I will deal with this matter.

Senator HUME:  I will obviously withdraw, but I would like you to review the standing orders on referring to a collective as opposed to individuals.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume, the implication is quite clear.

Senator HUME:  The implication was that the government was lying.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume! Senator Wong, please resume your seat. Senator Hume, please resume your seat.

Senator Hume interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  I've asked you to resume your seat. Senators, whilst I acknowledge there has been a lot of debate in the media and certain words used, the Senate chamber has standing orders and precedents, and one of those relates to the word that I asked you to withdraw. I don't intend to go through question time reminding every senator who stands to ask a question, or, indeed, any senator who responds, to withdraw. I've made a ruling on that. It's within the standing orders. It's within the precedents. When I ask you to withdraw, it's not an open invitation to debate with me. I note you have withdrawn. Please continue with your question.

Senator HUME:  After repeatedly and egregiously misleading the Australian people, how can the Australian people ever trust you or your government again?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:15):  Thank you for the question. The answer to that question is the Australian people can always trust this government to focus on cost of living.

Opposition senators interjecting—

Senator GALLAGHER:  As much as that hurts them over there, they know—

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Gallagher, please resume your seat. Order on my left! Minister Gallagher, please continue.

Senator GALLAGHER:  The Australian people can always trust this government to make the right decisions for the right reason, to front up and own those decisions, to explain those decisions and to focus on their needs. Your leader was out over the summer stoking division and calling for Woolworths to be boycotted—remember that?—and threatening the jobs of 200,000 Australians. While he was wandering around doing that, we were focused on the things that matter to the Australian people: how do we provide them with cost-of-living relief, when they need it, as soon as we can? When we took that decision, we fronted up, we owned it, we explained it and we will continue to do so.

We took that decision for the right reasons. It wasn't, as some might have said, that we went in with our eyes open that this was changing our position. It wasn't an easy decision. We looked at it carefully, but it became increasingly clear that this was a real way we could make a difference, with 11½ million Australians getting a bigger tax cut and every Australian taxpayer getting a tax cut—and you are backing it. You accept that it is the right policy for the right time. It's distracted you from having to follow the scare campaigns and the politics of division because you're having to back in something that is right. This is the right policy for the right economic circumstances. It will make a difference in household budgets, and we back it absolutely.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Hume, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator HUME (Victoria) (14:18):  It's terrific to hear, Minister, that you owned it. When asked repeatedly on the Today program last week to rule out changes to negative gearing, you said, 'It's not my government; it's the Albanese government', and, 'We have no plans on negative gearing.' Minister, are you trying to say, as the Treasurer did on Monday, that this was in fact a captain's call by the Prime Minister and nothing to do with you?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:18):  There was a lot of preamble there. I am standing here and I am taking responsibility. I am the finance minister. I was involved in the decisions. I did work over the summer with the Treasurer and the Prime Minister, laser focused on providing cost-of-living relief to Australian households. That's what matters. That's the work we did over summer while you were preparing for Nemesis and all your little slots on that, and Peter Dutton was out working out a way to lose 200,000 jobs at Woolworths. We were working on making sure that middle- and low-income households got a fair share of the tax cuts. That is the proposal that, whilst you have slithered and awkwardly moved around it, you are now backing and you accept is the right policy.

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Gallagher, I do remind you to refer to those in the other place by their correct titles. Senator Hume, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator HUME (Victoria) (14:19):  Minister, aren't you embarrassed that no Australian will ever trust anything that you or your colleagues say ever again?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:19):  The feedback I've had on the decision the government's taken has been overwhelmingly positive. They have appreciated the fact that the government is making decisions in the national interest based on the economic circumstances of the time. They're not interested in the silly games and the politics of division that you love, that you are addicted to, that you can't get off. They want a government to front up and to make decisions—sometimes hard decisions, and this is and was a hard decision. We knew it was changing our position. That's why the Prime Minister went to the Press Club and spoke about it. We've done interview after interview explaining our position. You said you opposed it, you were going to reverse it, you were absolutely going to roll it back. Now you've decided to back it. Anthony Albanese's tax plan is supported by the Liberal and National parties of Australia.

## United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

Senator FARUQI (New South Wales) (14:21):  My question is to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Penny Wong. Just when one thinks that the Labor government couldn't sink any lower on Palestine, they have made the appalling and extremely irresponsible decision to suspend funding for UNWRA. In four months of Israel's genocide, with more than 27,000 Palestinians killed, including over 11,000 children, you haven't uttered a word of condemnation, yet it took you no time at all to suspend life-saving funding to UNWRA, further enabling collective punishment of Palestinians as Israel continues its rampage and massacre in Gaza. UNWRA chief Mr Philippe Lazzarini has said that Israel has yet to present any evidence of its allegations to UNWRA. Minister, what evidence did you see before you made the catastrophic decision to suspend UNWRA's funding?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:22):  There is so much in that question which is false. It reminds us again that, just like Peter Dutton, the Greens—

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Wong, please refer to—

Senator WONG:  I'm sorry. Apologies. The opposition leader, Mr Dutton, and the Greens are on a unity ticket which is all about dividing the Australian community and weaponising this horrific conflict.

Opposition senators interjecting—

Senator WONG:  You're the same. You are. There are two facts in relation to UNWRA.

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Wong, please resume your seat. Senator McGrath—Senator Scarr. I beg your pardon.

Senator Scarr:  I take it as a compliment! The conflation of the Greens position with Peter Dutton—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator, what is your point of order?

Senator Scarr:  is a personal imputation.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Scarr, that is not a point of order. Minister Wong.

Senator WONG:  There are two things I'm going to say about UNWRA. There are two facts we cannot ignore in relation to UNWRA. The first is that they do life-saving work. I would remind you, Senator Faruqi, that we doubled the core funding to UNWRA. I remind you of that. It's something you never say, something you do not acknowledge. You're shaking your head now. See? Here we go again. The second point is that the recent allegations against its staff are grave and need to be investigated. Those facts are both true. That is why we have suspended, along with many of our like-minded partners, pending these matters being carefully considered.

I have to say it is of deep regret that, while the government are seeking to use our voice to advocate for the release of hostages, for the protection of civilian lives, for humanitarian access and for a pathway out of the conflict, we do not have partners in this effort in either the opposition or the Greens. They would rather see a community divided and they would rather try to use this to pick up votes. That is what is happening. That is the similarity between the opposition and the Greens. I remind the Greens that we still have 130 hostages being held by Hamas. I remind those opposite that there are 1.7 million people in Gaza who are internally displaced. The reality is that we are seeking to play a constructive role. There are two parties in this place who are playing politics with this conflict. One of them has just asked me a question. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Faruqi, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator FARUQI (New South Wales) (14:24):  Minister, I did not need a lesson in gaslighting. Millions of Palestinians have been forcibly displaced. Families are forced to move repeatedly in search of safety under Israel's bombardment. Over 66,000 Palestinians have been injured. Children are being starved and traumatised. Pregnant women are giving birth in tents. Given all this evidence of acute humanitarian needs and the urgency of aid, Minister Wong, when will you restore the funding? (Time expired)

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:25):  I would say to—

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Minister Wong, I'm sorry; resume your seat. Senators, there are very different opinions across this chamber on a range of matters. This is one. Senator Faruqi has the right to ask her question in silence, and the minister has the right to answer it in silence.

Senator WONG:  I would invite Senator Faruqi to perhaps consider what I said in the press conference on Thursday with the New Zealand foreign minister and defence ministers, where I went through precisely some of the facts to which she has averted. In an explanation amidst those who are attacking the government for our funding and support over many years, including under the previous government, of UNWRA, I reminded people why the Australian government now and previously has funded that organisation, and that is because it is the only entity which has been capable of delivering assistance into the Occupied Palestinian Territories. That is also why we increased the core funding. I'd invite you in your social media and public media to perhaps recognise that.

I also made the point that 1.7 million people are internally displaced. I made the point that there are increasingly few safe places for Palestinians to go. I reminded people that there are one million at risk of starvation and 400,000 Palestinians in Gaza that are— (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Faruqi, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator FARUQI (New South Wales) (14:26):  Minister, we're coming up to week 2 of complete silence from the Labor government on the International Court of Justice ruling which found that Israel is plausibly committing genocide and gave a clear signal to Australia to stop aiding, abetting and shielding Israel. Minister, when will the Labor government break its cowardly silence on the ICJ ruling?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:27):  Again, Senator Faruqi has not looked at what we have done and said. I would invite her to look at the joint statement that the Australian government—through the Minister for Defence, the Deputy Prime Minister, and I—alongside the New Zealand Prime Minister, has released with the 2+2 last week, which also specifically referenced the ICJ. I would refer her to our statement there, which included the expectation that we respect the independence of the ICJ and that we respect the critical role it plays in upholding international law and the rules based order. Both countries articulated—

Senator Faruqi interjecting—

Senator WONG:  You don't want to hear the answer, Senator Faruqi? You just want to personally attack me? Is that right?

Senator Faruqi interjecting—

Senator WONG:  It's par for the course. Our shared expectation is that Israel will act in accordance with the ICJ's ruling. You may not think that's of significance where two Five Eyes countries say that; I beg to differ. (Time expired)

## Taxation

Senator GROGAN (South Australia) (14:28):  My question is to the Minister representing the Treasurer, Senator Gallagher. From 1 July this year, the Albanese Labor government will deliver a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer. I know that Australians in my home state of South Australia have had it tough for the last couple of years, with cost-of-living pressures persisting. Can the minister inform the Senate about how many more Australians will benefit from the Albanese Labor government's tax cuts?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:28):  I thank Senator Grogan for the question. Yes, I am very pleased to confirm to the Senate that the Albanese Labor government is delivering a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer, commencing on 1 July. Labor's new tax cuts will make a real difference to 13.6 million Australians. Our tax cuts have been deliberately and carefully designed to provide bigger tax cuts for middle Australia, to help with those cost-of-living pressures while at the same time making the tax system fairer. We know that many Australians are under pressure right now and deserve a tax cut, including those living in Senator Grogan's home state of South Australia, where 89 per cent of South Australian taxpayers will get a bigger tax cut.

We've found a more responsible way to ensure more people get a bigger tax cut to help ease the pressure they're under. Under our plan, working Australians will keep more of the wages they earn, and we are proud to be delivering this significant economic reform which helps to increase labour supply in crucial industries, such as the care economy, which will need more workers in the future, with female labour supply expected to increase by around 0.4 per cent. Our tax cuts deliver a bigger benefit to more than 90 per cent of taxpayers in in-demand occupations such as teachers, nurses, aged-care and disability carers, and childcare workers. Importantly, building on the first budget surplus delivered in 15 years, our tax plan delivers more relief to more people in a way that is fiscally responsible and doesn't add to inflationary pressures. Treasury's advice makes it clear that our tax changes will not add to inflation pressures because they are broadly revenue neutral, and our changes also mean that every Australian taxpayer will receive a tax cut this year.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Grogan, a first supplementary?

Senator Thorpe interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Thorpe, come to order!

Senator Thorpe interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Thorpe, order! Senator Grogan, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator GROGAN (South Australia) (14:30):  Thank you, Senator Gallagher. That's very helpful. Eighty-nine per cent is significant for South Australia. It's clear that these tax cuts have been designed to offer greater relief for Middle Australia, addressing cost-of-living pressures and ensuring a fairer tax system. Can the minister outline how the adjustments to tax rates and thresholds will deliver a bigger benefit for more Australians?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:31):  Thank you—

Senator Thorpe:  How is it fair giving politicians a tax cut in this place?

The PRESIDENT:  Resume your seat, please, Minister.

Senator Thorpe:  How is that fair?

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Thorpe, I've called you to order about four times. That's three times too many. You are being disrespectful to me and to this chamber. Minister Gallagher, please continue.

Senator GALLAGHER:  I thank Senator Grogan for the supplementary question. Our tax reform package has been carefully designed to improve the financial wellbeing of Australians, particularly those in low- and middle-income brackets. From 1 July, the adjustments to tax rates and tax thresholds will deliver broader and more support to Australian taxpayers. We're reducing the 19 per cent rate to 16 per cent for incomes between $18,200 and $45,000, and we're reducing the 32½ per cent rate to 30 per cent for incomes up to $135,000, amongst other changes. This provides taxpayers with broader cost-of-living relief than under arrangements previously in place, especially those on low and middle incomes, who are more vulnerable to cost pressures. Our plan is projected to benefit over 13.6 million taxpayers, ensuring that a vast majority, including those in critical sectors—such as those in your home state, Senator Grogan, in education and health care—will see an increase in their take-home pay.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Grogan, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator GROGAN (South Australia) (14:32):  We know that Australians are continuing to do it tough, and the Albanese government's tax cuts are just the latest important element of the government's response to cost-of-living challenges being faced by Australians. Can the minister outline how Labor's tax cuts work to build on the existing suite of targeted cost-of-living measures that the government has already delivered for Australians?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:33):  I thank Senator Grogan for the supplementary question. As Senator Grogan outlined, this is just one part of our cost-of-living plan. Complementing the tax plan—the tax relief that we'll roll out on 1 July with the support of Senator Hume and others—the Albanese government is delivering real cost-of-living relief, much of which is opposed by those opposite. We do accept that the tax plan was initially opposed, and then they said: 'Oh, I don't know about this. We'd better crab walk away from that opposition on this one.' But they did oppose electricity bill relief. They did oppose making medicines cheaper. They did oppose making it easier and cheaper to see a doctor. They did oppose the Housing Australia Future Fund and the effort that we're putting in there. I believe they may have as well opposed fee-free TAFE. With all of these measures that go to make a difference to Australian households, we've had opposition from those opposite.

## Housing

Senator DAVID POCOCK (Australian Capital Territory) (14:34):  My question is to the Minister representing the Minister for Housing, Senator Farrell. With homeless Australians dying on the street at an average age of 44 years, a new survey by InfoChoice last week showed that seven out of 10 Australians are experiencing rental stress. Vacancy rates are at record lows, and people are lining up in their scores—often over 100—to view a single rental listing. What progress has National Cabinet made on rental reforms?

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:34):  I thank Senator Pocock for the question, and I don't disagree with any of the statistics that you've referred to there. This government fully understands that many Australians are finding it very tough in the current rental market. More than 30 per cent of Australians were renting a home at the last census, and obviously we hear the concerns of renters and are trying to take action to address them.

As you've referred to, there have been discussions with the states and the territories and with local government through the National Cabinet. The National Cabinet committed to a better deal for renters to harmonise and strengthen renters' rights across Australia. This included developing a nationally consistent framework with the requirement for genuine, reasonable grounds for eviction, moving towards limiting rental increases to once a year and phasing in minimum rental standards, among other changes to make renting fairer in this country. These changes will have a tangible impact for almost one-third of Australian households who rent. But we know that the best way to improve the position of renters is to increase the supply of homes. The Albanese government has committed to a very ambitious reform agenda. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Pocock, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator DAVID POCOCK (Australian Capital Territory) (14:36):  Thank you, Minister. The Prime Minister said on 28 April last year:

Housing Ministers will develop a proposal for National Cabinet in the second half of 2023 outlining reforms to strengthen renters' rights …

It's now February 2024. I'm wondering where the government's at and why this isn't more of a priority, given cost-of-living pressures being felt across the country.

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:37):  I thank Senator Pocock for his first supplementary question. It is the focus of all our reforms to boost the supply of housing—more social rental housing, more affordable housing and of course more private homes to rent and more homes to buy. What the government have done in the period that you're talking about, Senator Pocock, is the National Housing Accord, which will support planning and zoning reforms as well as the investment of $350 million in additional federal funding to deliver 10,000 affordable rental homes.

Secondly, the $2 billion social housing accelerator has been delivered, with announcements of projects already being made, and we look forward to around 4,000 new social rental homes being delivered from this funding. The federal government's $3 billion— (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Pocock, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator DAVID POCOCK (Australian Capital Territory) (14:38):  Thank you, Minister. We'll continue to wait for the proposal to strengthen renters' rights. In the meantime, because of the cost-of-living pressures, I'm interested to know: can you advise on how many Australians each month are accessing Foodbank around the country, and how many of them are accessing it for the first time?

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:38):  I thank Senator Pocock for his second supplementary question. I don't have those statistics available to me at the moment, Senator Pocock, but I will endeavour to get them as quickly as I possibly can and provide them to you and to the Senate. 

The PRESIDENT:  Thank you, Minister.

## Environment

Senator VAN (Victoria) (14:39):  My question is to Minister Wong, the Minister representing the Minister for the Environment and Water, Minister Plibersek. In light of the recent decision to reject the development proposal for the Port of Hastings project due to its projected impacts on the Ramsar listed Westernport wetlands, could the minister advise the chamber on the criteria and processes employed by the government in determining the support or rejection of significant projects, especially those intersecting with Australia's environmental obligations and renewable energy ambitions?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:40):  I thank Senator Van for the question. As a matter of general principle, what I would say to him is that any decision under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act is a decision that is made through the application of that law to the particular facts of the case. That is the way in which ministers of the Crown exercising their statutory obligations under that legislation have done so since its introduction, and that is the way Ms Plibersek would have approached this case. The fact is that every project—housing, mining, energy and so forth—is treated in this way—that is, the law is applied to the particular facts and the decision is made by the minister in relation to the application of the law to those facts.

I am advised the project was deemed unacceptable because the Port of Hastings failed to show it was consistent with federal environmental law, particularly with regard to the impact on internationally protected wetlands. I'm also advised that detailed reasons for the decision are publicly available online. I'm advised that the Port of Hastings is, of course, able to make another and revised application under the national environmental law and that senior officials from both the Victorian government and the federal government have already met to discuss possible next steps. The government will continue to consider each project on a case-by-case basis, consistent with the law, in the way I have outlined.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Van, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator VAN (Victoria) (14:41):  Given the paramount importance of developing clean energy infrastructure such as offshore wind farms for Australia's energy future, what steps has the government taken to reconcile the imperative of these developments with the safeguarding of our international environmental commitments and the biodiversity they aim to protect?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:42):  We agree with Senator Van as to the importance of developing renewable energy infrastructure. It is a regrettable fact that those opposite ensured that there was so little investment in the energy infrastructure the country needed over the nearly a decade that they were in government. We obviously need to ensure that these projects, like any other projects, are able to obtain approval under national environmental law in the way that I have described. I'm also advised that in fact the Albanese government is approving more renewable energy projects than ever before. In fact, we have seen the approval of some 42 renewable energy projects, which, combined, are enough to power over two million homes—equivalent to all households in Tassie, South Australia, the Northern Territory and the ACT.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Van, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator VAN (Victoria) (14:43):  Considering the critical balance between environmental preservation and the need to reduce carbon emissions, is the government contemplating the introduction of an environmental protection mechanism of some sort within the project assessment framework to ensure a comprehensive evaluation of projects that accounts for both their environmental impact and their carbon reductions?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:43):  The advice I have is that the government will continue to consider each project on a case-by-case basis under the existing law. I'm also asked to advise the Senate of the range of renewables that Minister Plibersek has approved, which included the solar farm in Queensland, producing enough power for around 200,000 households; in the senator's own home state of Victoria one of the world's largest battery systems, which will power up to a million Victorian homes; two solar farms in New South Wales; a new wind farm in one of Queensland's oldest mining regions; and a huge battery energy storage system in WA to ease pressure on the grid and help us transition to a renewable future. I'm also advised that there are in fact a record 125 other renewable energy projects in the environmental approval pipeline. In relation to the Port of Hastings, as I said, they are able to make a further application. (Time expired)

## Medicare

Senator LAMBIE (Tasmania) (14:44):  My question is to the Minister representing the Minister for Health and Aged Care. Last week, the government—indeed, Australia—celebrated Medicare's 40th birthday. To commemorate this, the Prime Minister said:

My Government is delivering on its commitment to strengthen Medicare and make it easier and cheaper to get quality healthcare, by tripling the bulk billing incentive and making medicines cheaper.

The health minister said:

It was a Labor Government that built Medicare and it is only a Labor Government who will continue to protect and strengthen Medicare.

Yet, on the ground, I am hearing and seeing from an increasing number of Tasmanians that they are finding it more difficult to see a doctor. We have the lowest bulk-billing take-up in the nation, and waiting times to see specialists are way longer than they have ever been. So, Minister, what is your government and your Labor senators from Tasmania doing to encourage more doctors to take up bulk-billing in Tasmania?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:45):  I thank Senator Lambie for the question. It's a really important question on how we can continue to strengthen Medicare, particularly in states where there have historically been issues around bulk-billing. We have the same issues here in the ACT as Tasmania around bulk-billing, with GP shortages and shortages for specialists as well. It is something that small jurisdictions have always struggled with because a large number of medical professionals tend to move to some of the bigger cities.

But I think when you look back on the last 18 months of what we've tried to do—and, yes, the health system is massive and it often takes time for investments to show results—what we've seen with the urgent care clinics and with the bulk-billing rates across the nation in just the few months since we provided that tripling of the incentive for bulk-billing are good results. They are early results, but they are good results. I think the GP bulk-billing rate rose by 2.1 percentage points in the first two months since that tripling of the bulk-billing incentive was introduced through the budget.

I know the Minister for Health and Aged Care has been working with the Premier of Tasmania around models of care that work for Tasmania, including, I think, partnerships between the hospitals and primary health care, acknowledging some of the particular issues that Tasmania has. I know that the urgent care clinics are up and running and are incredibly popular.

But there is more to be done. We've got to encourage more people into general practice. We've got to look at incentives to support that. The health minister is doing all of those things. But we inherited a system that was failing. Bulk-billing rates were declining. GPs were under enormous pressure. We have made the investments that those opposite never did to fix it. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Lambie, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator LAMBIE (Tasmania) (14:48):  In Tasmania, especially in regional areas like the north-west, we have the oldest, sickest and poorest Australians. I am hearing from GPs, specialists and allied health professionals that it's getter harder and harder to service regional areas. Waiting times for their patients are increasing. Goodness me, in Burnie itself, it takes six months to get a podiatry appointment for anyone. Minister, how do you reconcile longer waiting times and reduced access to health services with 'continuing to protect and strengthen Medicare'?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:48):  I think I answered some of that in the first question. I would say that the government's responsibility around Medicare is to strengthen it and to provide those investments in it. On bulk-billing, where I said the national average was a 2.1 per cent increase across Australia, in Tasmania in two months the incentive increased bulk-billing by 5.7 per cent. That means Tasmanians saved $990,000 between November and December through the bulk-billing incentive. Tasmanians have saved more than $5 million on cheaper medicines. They have saved money through the 60-day prescribing. We know that there are a lot of people who are eligible for that. We've got the urgent care clinics, where we've had over 13,500 presentations in those areas. We've got the GP grants going out. Tasmanians have got $3.46 million worth of those grants. But there is more to be done, because we want everyone to have access to affordable health care in this country. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Lambie, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator LAMBIE (Tasmania) (14:49):  As part of its 40th birthday, Medicare is releasing a 'special edition Medicare card in 2024 to commemorate the 40th anniversary of Australia's world-class universal health insurance scheme'. I'm just wondering: how much is that costing the taxpayer, for a brand-new shiny little card when we've already got one?

Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Service, Minister for Finance, Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive Council) (14:50):  I'll see if there's any further information I can provide on that. My understanding is: they are going to be issued to people whose cards expire this year—so it's for people whose cards are going to expire; it won't be a re-issuing for everybody. People who have a digital card—those who have it on their myGov app or through the Medicare app—will also see it reflected on that electronic Medicare card. But my understanding is: it's only to be provided to those who have a card that expires this year.

## Cost of Living

Senator O'NEILL (New South Wales) (14:50):  My question is to the Minister representing the Minister for Social Services, Minister Farrell. Can the minister update the Senate on what measures the Albanese Labor government is taking to help ease the cost-of-living pressures felt by Australian families?

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:51):  I thank Senator O'Neill for her very important question. Yes, I can provide an answer to that question. From 1 July, the Albanese Labor government is delivering a tax cut for every Australian taxpayer—

Senator Ciccone:  Wow!

Senator FARRELL:  You're right: 'Wow!'—to help tackle the cost-of-living pressures felt by families right across this country. These tax cuts are on top of the other significant supports introduced by the Albanese government through our $23 billion cost-of-living relief package, which is already helping ease the pressure on families and workers right across Australia. This includes: cheaper child care and extending paid parental leave; cheaper medicines and making it cheaper for more Australians to see a GP; and increasing income support payments for Australians who need them.

Now we've taken these measures even further by delivering Labor's tax cuts, which are going to put more money back into the pockets of workers and families. Under Labor's tax cuts, Australians earning low and middle incomes will receive a greater cut compared to the Scott Morrison plan—the former Prime Minister—as I recollect, including an additional—

An honourable senator interjecting— 

Senator FARRELL:  He's no thug; he wasn't a thug—including an additional 2.9 million people who have received nothing. Thanks to our changes to the Medicare levy low-income thresholds, more low-income families and individuals are going to pay less each year. Tackling cost-of-living pressures is the No. 1 priority of the Albanese Labor government. That's why we're working to cut taxes, boost wages, bring inflation under control and deliver— (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator O'Neill, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator O'NEILL (New South Wales) (14:53):  Thank you very much, Senator Farrell, for your answer. Can the minister also outline how Labor's efforts to ease cost-of-living pressures will benefit workers, families and taxpayers in my great home state of New South Wales?

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:53):  I thank Senator O'Neill for her first supplementary question. Labor's tax cuts and our policies do deliver cost-of-living relief—great news for New South Wales. Under Labor's plan, around 83 per cent of taxpayers in New South Wales will receive—I'll repeat that: 83 per cent will receive—a bigger tax cut. This is in addition to the cost-of-living relief that we've delivered for people in New South Wales, with 338,000 people benefiting from our increases to JobSeeker payments and 308,000 households eligible for the increased maximum rate of Commonwealth rent assistance. These measures will assist cost of living, and Labor's tax cuts will put more money into the pockets of families, workers and taxpayers right across New South Wales.

The PRESIDENT:  Senator O'Neill, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator O'NEILL (New South Wales) (14:54):  I thank the minister for his answer. It's fantastic to hear that families in New South Wales can count on this government to address the cost of living, with 83 per cent better off in New South Wales. Can the minister also advise the Senate of what the blockages have been in delivering the Albanese Labor government's plan for easing cost-of-living pressure for Australian families?

Senator FARRELL (South Australia—Minister for Trade and Tourism, Special Minister of State and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:55):  I thank Senator O'Neill for her second supplementary question. We are serious about tackling the cost-of-living pressures faced by families across Australia. However, at every turn, the leader of the coalition, Peter Dutton, and the coalition have stood in the way, including when it comes to our actions on electricity bill relief, cheaper child care, cheaper medicines, fee-free TAFE, more social and affordable housing and getting wages for Australian workers and their families moving again. Cost-of-living relief remains our No. 1 priority, and we will continue to take action, even if the coalition continues its negativity and its obstruction. Labor's tax cuts are the next step in our broader plans to ease cost-of-living pressures by boosting incomes, reducing costs and delivering relief for families.

## Renewable Energy

Senator CANAVAN (Queensland) (14:55):  My question is to the Minister representing the Minister for Climate Change and Energy, Minister Wong. Minister, the government's own community engagement review of renewable energy projects surveyed 250 landowners and community members who live in close proximity to renewable energy infrastructure or transmission projects. The results of that survey are a shocking wake-up call: 92 per cent of respondents are dissatisfied with the engagement of project developers, and 85 per cent said their concerns were not addressed in a timely manner. Farmers like Ben Duxson, who's here in the gallery today from central Victoria, have travelled to Canberra to express their concerns about the farm-destroying projects like VNI West being promoted by this government. Minister, why has the government not listened to people like Ben and adjusted its plans to install 22,000 solar panels a day and a wind turbine every 18 hours in response to the immense opposition to these projects in rural and regional Australia?

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (14:57):  I acknowledge those who attended the rally and those who are here today in the gallery. But I would say to you, Senator Canavan, that you and your party spent nearly a decade refusing to ensure that this country had the infrastructure which was required to transition to renewable energy—to clean energy. You did. You, Mr Joyce and others had 10 years to fix this up, and all that happened because of your opposition is that more generating capacity exited the system. It's quite a remarkable achievement. At a time when demand was increasing, you actually presided over less supply. I know that is hard.

Senator Canavan:  Point of order on relevance: my question went to the concerns of farmers. The minister spent almost half the answer speaking about the previous government, not those concerns that were revealed in her own government's report.

An incident having occurred in the gallery—

The PRESIDENT:  Order in the gallery! It's not appropriate to make any comment, including clapping. Minister, I'll draw you to the question.

Senator WONG:  With respect, I do think it's relevant that, in fact, the energy system in Australia was reducing in terms of the capacity which was required because there was insufficient investment in generation. That is a real fact, and it's an economic fact. Having said that, I understand that Minister Bowen stood up on Friday in regional New South Wales and released the final report of the Australian Energy Infrastructure Commissioner, Mr Dyer, on the Community Engagement Review. Commissioner Dyer and his team have undertaken fine work. They've engaged with communities from across Australia about their experiences of energy development. This review will help ensure local landholders and regional communities are heard and receive real benefits from the renewable energy transformation. We know that, for far too long—

An incident having occurred in the gallery—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! I'll remind the people in the gallery that, if you interject, you'll be removed.

Senator Colbeck interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order, Senator Colbeck! You understand the procedures in this chamber. It is my job to maintain order. That includes you. Don't talk back. You're not in a debate with me. Minister, please continue.

Senator WONG:  It is the case that community engagement around infrastructure hasn't been up to scratch and we do need to make the reforms necessary to improve community engagement. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Canavan, a first supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator CANAVAN (Queensland) (14:59):  Minister, Mr Glen Kelly is also here in the gallery. He operates a fifth-generation family farm just outside of Rockhampton. He has travelled here with thousands of others to attend the rally this morning. Glen faces the destruction of his local environment due to the construction of 50 massive wind turbines that are three times the height of the Parliament House flag and the destruction of koala and sugar glider habitats. Why isn't the government listening to people like Glen about the impacts of these industrial projects in rural communities?

Senator Whish-Wilson interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! Senator Whish-Wilson, order!

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (15:00):  What I would say to Mr Kelly—

Senator Davey interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Davey!

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! Senator Davey, I should not have to call you twice, nor you, Senator McKim. I asked for order across the chamber. I'm sorry, Senator McKim—I meant Senator Whish-Wilson. Order across the chamber!

Senator WONG:  What I would say to Mr Kelly and his friends and colleagues—and what I would say to you, Senator Canavan—is: I remind you that the system under which these complaints are being made is the system that was in place under your government. As I understand it, the reason the minister has commissioned a report from Commissioner Dyer is in order to improve it. Again, the system under which these complaints are being made was a coalition government system. We are now seeking, through the report, that—

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! Particularly on my left. Minister, please continue.

Senator WONG:  I'll repeat myself. This system was the system in place under the previous government. That is the system under which these complaints are being made, and no amount of yelling is going to distract from that. What are trying to do is improve it, because we accept—

Honourable senators interjecting—

Senator WONG:  That is the intention of Commissioner Dyer's review. It's to try and improve it. (Time expired)

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Canavan, a second supplementary?

:hiccup [:hr {:style {:border "solid #ff6300 1px"}}]

Senator CANAVAN (Queensland) (15:02):  Thank you, Madam Acting President. Well, Minister—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator, I'm not the 'acting president'.

Senator CANAVAN:  Sorry, Madam President. Minister, we didn't have a ridiculous 82 per cent renewable energy target, but you have. We didn't have that. Frank Future is the owner of Imagine Cruises at Port Stephens in New South Wales. He left Port Stephens at 3 am to make sure he could get here today. He is concerned that his whale watching and dolphin cruise business will be decimated by the proposed offshore wind farm, which will harm wildlife and destroy his important tourism economy. Why is this government so intent on destroying our environment in pursuit of its ridiculous 82 per cent renewable energy target?

An incident having occurred in the gallery—

The PRESIDENT:  Before I call the minister, I remind those in the gallery that, if you interject again, you will be removed. I also remind those in the chamber that—

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order!

Senator Canavan interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order! Senator Canavan, you've asked a serious question. I presume you want an answer. I also ask senators not to interject, because Senator Canavan has the right to ask his question in silence.

Senator WONG (South Australia—Minister for Foreign Affairs and Leader of the Government in the Senate) (15:03):  I think Senator Canavan indicated yet again what is actually driving this from his perspective and what led to those opposite in government never doing anything about this: you are opposed to renewables. It's very clear.

Senator Canavan interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Senator Canavan, you've asked your question.

Senator WONG:  That's fine. At least you're upfront about it. Unfortunately Mr Morrison and Mr Dutton took a different view in not being upfront about it. I will make a second point. Let me read this quote.

Honourable senators interjecting—

Senator WONG:  Can I read this quote? Please, this is a very important quote—

Honourable senators interjecting—

The PRESIDENT:  Order!

Senator WONG:  A particular person said this, and I'll tell you who it was at the end: 'The habitat for renewables should be on rooftops and wind towers. It should be offshore.'

Senator Watt:  Who said that?

Senator WONG:  Mr Littleproud said that. So, when they come to your rallies and tell you how much of a friend they are, perhaps we should recognise that their own Nationals leader has argued that these projects should be offshore. 

President, I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.